Title: Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and 'What-if' Scenarios

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.14406v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 00:53:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 

## SIMON W.S. FISCHER, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, The Netherlands 

## HANNA SCHRAFFENBERGER, Interdisciplinary Hub for Digitalization and Society (iHub) and Institute for Computing and Information Sciences (iCIS), Radboud University, The Netherlands 

## MIRANDA L. VAN HOOFF, Radboud UMC, The Netherlands and Sint Maartenskliniek, The Netherlands 

## SERGE THILL, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, The Netherlands 

## PIM HASELAGER, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, The Netherlands 

Clinical decision-making is augmented by decision-support systems (DSSs). To counter overreliance on DSSs, several methods have been proposed that create friction in order to promote cognitive engagement and reflection. In this paper, we investigate how two such forms of friction, namely data-driven questions and ‘what-if’ analysis, are perceived by medical experts. For a real-world decision task, we replicated a DSS used in clinical practice and gathered clinicians’ feedback on a prototype through in-situ interviews (n=7). Our findings suggest that while the questions were perceived as unhelpful for reflective thinking, they could serve as reminders to consider relevant information. Furthermore, inspecting ‘what-if’ hypotheticals was found useful for potentially improving patient care. Clinicians saw our prototype as a promising training tool for novice clinicians. From the clinicians’ feedback, we make recommendations for designing friction in work practices. Our work contributes to human-AI interaction research, which aims to encourage reflection to mitigate AI overreliance. CCS Concepts: • Information systems → Decision support systems ; • Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction (HCI) ; Interaction paradigms .Additional Key Words and Phrases: cognitive engagement, overreliance, human-AI decision-making, counterfactual reasoning, workplace 

ACM Reference Format: 

Simon W.S. Fischer, Hanna Schraffenberger, Miranda L. van Hooff, Serge Thill, and Pim Haselager. 2026. Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios. In Proceedings of . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 21 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

Authors’ Contact Information: Simon W.S. Fischer, simon.fischer@donders.ru.nl, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Dpt. of Human-Centred Intelligent Systems, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Hanna Schraffenberger, hanna.schraffenberger@ru.nl, Interdisciplinary Hub for Digitalization and Society (iHub) and Institute for Computing and Information Sciences (iCIS), Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Miranda L. van Hooff, Radboud UMC, Dpt. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nijmegen, The Netherlands and Sint Maartenskliniek, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Serge Thill, serge.thill@donders.ru.nl, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Dpt. of Human-Centred Intelligent Systems, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Pim Haselager, pim.haselager@donders.ru.nl, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Dpt. of Human-Centred Intelligent Systems, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. Manuscript submitted to ACM Manuscript submitted to ACM 1

> arXiv:2606.14406v1 [cs.HC] 12 Jun 2026

2 Fischer et al. 

1 Introduction 

In healthcare, decision-support systems (DSSs) are used for diagnosis, treatment prediction, and resource allocation [ 30 , 48 , 52 , 55 ]. Clinical DSSs have the potential to improve patient care by providing additional information to help physicians make decisions [ 40 ]. At the same time, however, studies point to the risk that decision-makers, including experts, may accept incorrect recommendations from DSSs, a phenomenon known as overreliance, which can lead to harmful consequences such as misdiagnoses [13, 23, 26, 50, 54]. To mitigate overreliance, so-called frictional design approaches have been proposed, which intentionally introduce interruptions into human-AI interaction. As such, some systems provide recommendations only once the decision-maker has made a (provisional) decision [ 17 ], or they do not provide any recommendation but instead provide explanations both for and against a decision [ 35 ]. The aim of such (productive) friction is to promote the cognitive engagement and critical thinking of decision-makers [ 10 , 18 , 37 ]. It is thus further proposed that DSSs should not only provide recommendations to decision-makers, but should also challenge them [ 46 ], whether through so-called provocations [14] or through a ‘reflection machine’ that raises questions [19]. Questions are particularly of interest, as they can help foster critical thinking skills [ 21 , 22 ], stimulate reflection, which has been shown to improve decision-making [ 20 , 33 , 42 ], and sustain or even increase expertise [ 38 ]. Therefore, it seems desirable for a decision-support system to not only provide recommendations or predictions but also to raise questions that help decision-makers reflect on the decision at hand, for example, by generating hypothetical (‘what-if’) scenarios. So far, the potential of questions in human-AI decision-making remains underexplored. Two prominent studies examine the effects of questions on the assessment of information validity [ 11 ] and in the context of financial investment decisions [ 45 ]. Although both studies suggest that questions can encourage reflective thinking, neither focuses on a decision task involving a decision-support system that provides recommendations. Furthermore, many friction-based approaches are evaluated with laypeople as decision-makers or on the basis of simplified decision tasks [ 27 , 44 ]. It therefore remains uncertain how well questions, and friction in general, perform in real-world settings and within existing workflows. In this paper, we investigate how two such forms of friction, namely questions and ‘what-if’ hypotheticals, fit into professional practice and whether they are perceived valuable by experienced decision-makers. In particular, we focus on the medical context, where clinicians have been using a decision-support system in clinical practice for several years. In view of this, we have the following research questions and design goal (DG1): 

• RQ1. How do clinicians perceive questions during decision-making? 

• RQ2. How do clinicians perceive ‘what-if’ scenarios in the decision-making process? 

• DG1. Develop a proof-of-concept prototype that outputs questions based on input data (i.e., patient information) and DSS predictions, and also allows for the manual creation of ‘what-if’ questions or scenarios. To examine the potential impact on clinical decision-making of a prototype system that generates questions and ‘what-if’ scenarios, we conducted in-situ interviews with seven clinical spine specialists (n=7). For our design goal (DG1), we replicated a DSS used by 11 clinicians in their day-to-day decision-making regarding the treatment of chronic low back pain. Compared to the original DSS, our prototype not only displays the predictions regarding treatment outcomes, but also data-driven questions, such as “Is it possible to change the smoking behaviour? This would increase the predicted effectiveness of surgery by 20%” (Table 1). In order to manually create hypothetical ‘what-if’ questions or scenarios, we decided to implement an interactive element (Fig. 2). Using sliders, clinicians can modify the input 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 3data (i.e., patient information), with the corresponding updated DSS predictions displayed accordingly. The interactive visualisation thus offers insight into the question, “What is the prediction, if this input changes?” .Our findings suggest that our experienced participants did not find the questions posed by our prototype particularly helpful in stimulating reflection on the decision, as they were ‘too obvious’. Nevertheless, participants also noted that questions can serve as a reminder to engage with information, for example at the end of the day when attention begins to wane. The interactive ‘what-if’ visualisation was found to be useful, as it allows for modifying information, investigating alternatives to the prediction (i.e., “the large solution space”), and enriching discussions with patients, all of which can contribute to improving patient care. Furthermore, our participants pointed out that both the questions and the ‘what-if’ analysis could be particularly useful for novice clinicians in learning how to use the DSS and in adopting a more critical approach to its predictions. Overall, these findings suggest that friction strategies, such as questions and ‘what-if’ scenarios, can generally serve several purposes: stimulating reflective thinking, serving as a reminder, providing practical approaches to action, promoting understanding of the DSS, and acting as an educational tool. Based on feedback from clinicians, we identify factors that can help make friction strategies more effective and better aligned with existing workflows. Our findings can therefore help inform the design of future systems and interfaces in the medical domain and, beyond that, aim to improve decision-making by adding friction and promoting cognitive engagement. This paper makes the following contributions: (1) We present a proof-of-concept prototype that outputs data-driven questions and enables the creation of ‘what-if’ scenarios (section 3.1). (2) Using a realistic, complex, and open-ended clinical decision task, we provide insights into how expert decision-makers perceive two forms of friction, namely questions and hypothetical ‘what-if’ scenarios (sections 5.1- 5.5). (3) Based on the clinicians’ feedback, we provide recommendations for the design of future friction strategies in professional practice (section 5.6). 

2 Background and Related Work 

Our focus is on human-AI decision-making in the workplace. Relevant literature thus comes from human-computer interaction, psychology, and computer-supported cooperative work. We will discuss approaches to friction in human-AI interaction aimed at stimulating reflection and critical thinking, both in general and specifically through questions. 

2.1 Frictional Design in Human-AI Decision-Making 

Frictional design intentionally adds (cognitive) interruptions, or micro-boundaries that slow down the decision-making process [ 10 , 18 , 37 ]. Based on dual-process theory of thinking [ 24 ], friction aims to facilitate the transition from the fast and intuitive thinking of System 1 to the more slow and conscious thinking of System 2 [ 6 ]. In human-AI decision-making, friction ideally calibrates reliance on DSSs and helps to mitigate the potential negative effects of adopting incorrect recommendations, i.e., overreliance [4, 12, 44]. Various design approaches have been suggested to promote the decision-maker’s cognitive engagement, reflection, and critical thinking during human-AI decision-making. Some examples include: allowing the decision-maker to make a provisional decision before the AI advise is displayed [ 4, 17 ], delaying the presentation of recommendations [ 4, 41 ], providing second opinions on AI recommendations [ 31 ], providing confidence scores of the prediction [ 28 , 56 ], providing partial explanations [ 12 ], or providing evidence both for and against a decision instead of a recommendation [ 5 , 35 ]. In addition, counterfactual explanations serve to provide decision-makers actionable insights to demonstrate ‘what 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

4 Fischer et al. would have (had) to be different in order to achieve a desirable outcome’ [ 25 , 51 ]. For the creation of these ‘what-if’ hypotheticals, interactive explanations are proposed [ 34 , 47 ]. Counterfactual reasoning can be particularly helpful in healthcare, where different interventions need to be weighed against one another [43]. One study, which, like ours, focuses on a real-world decision-making task and is evaluated with experts, was conducted by Bach et al . [2] . They investigate whether three different strategies can help to mitigate anchoring bias (i.e., the decision being influenced by the information perceived first) in clinical decision-making. To this end, Bach et al . [2] implemented their strategies into an existing decision-support system that ophthalmologists use to detect diabetic retinopathy in patients. The three strategies are, 1) hear the story first , in which the decision-maker has to make their decision before seeing the DSS advise [ 17 ], 2) decision justification , which “prompts decision-makers to explain their reasoning to activate reflective thinking” [ 2], and 3) consider the opposite , which prompts “the decision-maker to consider information that contradicts their current beliefs” [ 2 ]. The study participants, i.e., six ophthalmologists, rated the ‘consider the opposite’ strategy as most useful, but expressed concerns about being fact-checked by the DSS. Therefore, Bach et al . [2] advise for more subtle design patterns during human-AI interaction. In addition, the authors note that their mitigation strategies are limited to a specific use case, which is why they call for similar studies in different healthcare settings than ophthalmology. Following this call, we examine how healthcare professionals experience two forms of friction, namely receiving questions and investigating ‘what-if’ scenarios. Our proposed approach of asking questions and presenting ‘what-if’ hypotheticals comes close to ‘decision justification’ (2) and ‘consider the opposite’ (3) by Bach et al . [2] , as it aims to encourage reflection and examination of the reasons for a decision, as well as the consideration of alternatives to the prediction. Moreover, questions offer a more subtle design pattern than the three mitigation strategies. Based on a realistic and complex decision task, namely the treatment of chronic low back pain, we aim to illuminate how friction strategies can be integrated into existing workflows. 

2.2 Stimulating Reflection Through Questions 

Reflective thinking has been shown to improve clinical decision-making and is a common practice in healthcare [20 , 33 , 42 ]. One way to stimulate reflection is through questions [ 39 ]. Despite recent efforts to encourage reflection during human-AI decision-making [ 1 , 14 , 29 , 32 , 49 ], and the various design patterns discussed above (section 2.1), few have investigated the potential of questions [8, 11, 45]. Danry et al . [11] show that questions, compared to causal explanations, can improve the discernment of logical statements. For their study, they present participants with valid and invalid statements, and provide either 1) a causal explanation related to the statement, or 2) a question adapted from the causal explanation in the form of “If premise 

does it follow that claim ?”. The findings suggest that questions improve the assessment of these statements. A reason could be that questions promote and lead to self-explanations, which improve understanding [7]. For a financial investment task, Reicherts et al . [45] present a chatbot that asks expert investors questions about their investment hypotheses and the reasoning behind them. Targeted questions are designed to help investors reflect on their assumptions and spot potential cognitive and emotional biases, i.e., promote metacognitive thinking. For example, the bot asks whether recent news has any relevance for a decision (i.e., availability bias). Overall, the participants found those questions effective in preventing impulsive actions. Furthermore, a participant in another study on investment decisions remarked in an interview, “Even if just a simple message appears asking if this price is truly appropriate, I think I would calm down and reconsider” [36 ]. Such a ‘simple message’ would be in line with the subtle design pattern Bach et al. [2] recommend. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 5Although both studies report positive effects of questions [ 11 , 45 ], neither study focuses on a decision task involving a decision-support system that provides a recommendation or predictions. We therefore investigate whether data-driven questions can help stimulate reflection during a complex real-world decision-making task in which decision-makers use a DSS. Since there are various types of questions, a question taxonomy for machine-assisted decision-making has been proposed [ 16 ]. The taxonomy, which is based on concepts of critical thinking, identifies ten elements in machine-assisted decision-making that questions can relate to. Accordingly, to name a few, questions can relate to the input data, the dataset used to train the DSS, the causal structure of the recommendation, and alternatives to the recommendation. The taxonomy thus helps identify and formulate relevant questions intended to stimulate critical thinking. We will use this question taxonomy to identify questions our prototype can present (see section 3.1.2). 

3 Use Case and Decision Task: Treatment of Chronic Low Back Pain 

To assess whether questions and ‘what-if’ scenarios can promote cognitive engagement among decision-makers in professional practice, we focus on the medical field, in particular, the treatment of chronic low back pain (CLBP). CLBP is a complex condition, the exact cause of which is often unknown [ 9]. In many cases, it is thus uncertain whether a treatment will result in improvement. Hence, there is no clear ‘ground truth’. To more effectively treat patients with a wide range of available treatment options, two approaches can help, namely 1) classification systems that classify a heterogeneous patient group into subgroups that are more likely to benefit from a specific treatment, and 2) clinical prediction rules that estimate the likelihood of a treatment outcome based on meaningful patient characteristics [9]. We collaborated with hospital clinicians from a spinal department who work with a DSS that combines both approaches. The DSS considers three treatment options: spine surgery, a combined physical and psychological program, and counselling by the surgeon with referral to physiotherapy. Furthermore, the DSS categorises patients into two outcome groups for each treatments: ‘responder’ (success) and ‘non-responder’ (failure), depending on whether the patient’s functional status improves as a result of the treatment. Overall, this results in a total of six treatment prognoses (3 treatments 𝑥 2 outcomes) (Fig 1). To make decisions about how to treat the patients’ chronic low back pain, the clinicians use the DSS in two ways: first, for patient triage to ensure the patient sees the right specialist, and second, to prepare for and during the patient consultation. The DSS makes predictions based on tabular data from a patient self-report questionnaire. The questionnaire covers five areas: socio-demographic, pain, psychological, somatic, and quality of life. The predictive factors, as well as the clinical prediction rules, were defined by researchers at the same hospital where the DSS is used in clinical practice. This means the DSS could be tailored to the hospital’s patient population. Nevertheless, due to the complexity of CLBP, the provided predictions should be viewed critically. With our prototype that presents questions and ‘what-if’ scenarios, we aim to support clinicians with this critical and reflective decision-making process. 

3.1 Our Prototype 

With regard to our design goal (DG1), we developed a proof-of-concept prototype in the form of an interactive Dash 1

app that outputs data-driven questions alongside treatment predictions (Fig. 1). To this end, we replicated the DSS used at the spinal department ( 𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑐 ). A clinical researcher involved in its development, also an author of this paper, provided us with relevant information, enabling us to create a functional replica ( 𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎 ) of the 𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑐 . Moreover, 

> 1https://dash.plotly.com/ Manuscript submitted to ACM

6 Fischer et al. 

Fig. 1. The interface of our prototype. It is possible to select a synthetic patient case, for which the information is displayed below. The predictions are shown for the three treatment options, divided into responder (success) and non-responder (failure) categories. At the bottom, questions are displayed in plain text. The current tab displays the seventh question, which computationally creates perturbations for a given case in order to output a forward-looking ‘what-if’ question. 

during a preparatory meeting, a clinician gave us an introduction to how the 𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑐 is used in practice, and showed us how the predictions and the patient data, including the answers to the questionnaire, are presented. This allowed us to design our interface and the presentation of treatment predictions in a way that is familiar to the clinicians, namely in the form of bar charts divided into two categories: responder (success) and non-responder (failure), with one bar for each treatment option (Fig. 1). 

3.1.1 Dataset. As we did not have access to real patient data, we generated tabular data using Mimesis 2, based on the data schema from the patient questionnaire, which is also used for the 𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑐 . When predicting treatment success, the 𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑐 takes into account only the aggregated responses of the patient questionnaire. Therefore, we generated only the final scores for our purposes, not the responses to individual questionnaire items. For example, one variable in the patient questionnaire is the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) score, which indicates the disability caused by 

> 2https://mimesis.name/ Manuscript submitted to ACM

Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 7

> Table 1. Our prototype presents the following questions, alongside the treatment predictions. These questions build on a taxonomy of questions for critical reflection in machine-assisted decision-making [16].

Variable Taxonomy Element Question 

Age Model Behaviour (Q10) (1) Is the patient’s age of 47 years relevant to consider in this case? The patient of 47 years is approaching the red-flag threshold which is 50 years. Age correlates with the effect of surgery. Previous Surgery Case Information (Q1) (2) When was the specified surgery performed and at which location of the spine? Previous surgeries reduce the effect of surgery by 15% - 25%. Confidence of Clinician Assumptions and expectations of decision-maker (Q6) (3) How confident are you about your decision? The confidence of the prediction for the most effective treatment (surgery 59.92%) is at 42.58%. Assumptions of Clinician Assumptions and expectations of decision-maker (Q6) (4) What are you taking for granted here? (5) Does the prediction match your assumptions? (6) Does the prediction change your initial judgement? If so, why? Hypothetical Change Intervention (Q9) (7) Is it possible to change expected recovery from ‘no’ (current) to ‘yes’? It would increase the predicted effectiveness of surgery by 24.67%, from 24.67% to 54.19%. low back pain. The score ranges from 0 to 100 and is calculated based on 10 sub-items, with higher scores indicating greater disability. So although our data set is more compact than the actual questionnaire data, this has no impact on the functionality of our 𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎 . For both, 𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑐 & 𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎 , a prediction for a single patient is based on 12 features, consisting of binary (e.g., expected recovery), ordinal (e.g., pain levels), and continuous values (e.g., ODI score). Therefore, the schema of our synthetic data does not differ from real data. 

3.1.2 Question Generation. To identify relevant questions that our prototype could output, we used the aforementioned question taxonomy [ 16 ]. We implemented seven questions (Table 1), which correspond to four categories in the taxonomy, namely case information (Q1), assumptions and expectations of decision-maker (Q6), change intervention 

(Q9), and model behaviour (Q10). Four of our questions are based on the DSS behaviour and input data, namely those relating to the patient’s age (Q10), previous surgeries (Q1), the clinician’s confidence (Q6), and hypotheticals (Q9). The other three questions are general and not data-driven, all relating to the assumptions of the decision-maker (Q6). The questions are presented in plain text below the predictions and in tabs, in order to display only one question at a time (Fig. 1). The first question concerns the functionality of the DSS, taking into account a built-in threshold. The DSS correlates the patient’s age with the predicted effect of surgery. If the age crosses a certain threshold of 50 years, the prediction changes. In our prototype, a question is displayed when a patient approaches this threshold ( 𝑇 ± 5), asking whether the patient’s age should receive more attention. We selected this question in order to reduce the static, fixed nature of a single threshold value. The second question concerns the patient’s information (i.e., case data). Previous operations influence the effectiveness of subsequent operations. It is important, however, to consider when and where on the spine previous surgeries were performed. If the previous surgery was performed 20 years ago, further surgeries are likely to be more effective compared than if the previous surgery was performed two years ago. The same applies to the region where previous surgeries were performed. If the previous surgery was performed on a completely different part of the spine, its effect on further surgery is negligible. Hence, this question prompts the decision-maker to further contextualise certain information. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

8 Fischer et al. In addition, we add an estimate of the impact of the factor of previous surgery on the outcome, which is similar to a feature contribution. To calculate this impact, we use feature perturbation, which we will describe in more detail below when discussing the seventh question. The third question asks how confident the decision-maker is about their decision. To provide the clinician with a reference point and enable a comparison between their own assessment and the DSS prediction, we include the confidence score for the prediction with the highest score. To calculate the confidence value, the probability of the most effective treatment is normalised over all three treatment probabilities of one category, i.e., responder or non-responder. The fourth, fifth, and sixth questions address the clinician’s assumptions and whether the DSS predictions confirm or change those assumptions. For this, the prototype outputs general questions that are not informed or based on data. The questions nevertheless require the clinicians to be more explicit about initial considerations regarding the case. The seventh question concerns hypotheticals and possible interventions to increase the likelihood of a desired outcome. Similar to counterfactual reasoning, this approach checks what the output, i.e., prediction, would be if the input, i.e., patient information, were different. Our prototype uses this information, however, to call into question the possibility of changing said value to make a desired treatment outcome more likely, e.g., “Is it possible to change factor x? This would increase expected effectiveness by 20%” . So instead of a backward-looking evaluation, as is the case with counterfactuals, we provide a forward-looking (‘what-if’ or ‘how-to-be-that’) hypothetical. To this end, we perturb the features of the patient case, compare the predictions of each perturbation to the original case, and search for the maximum change in outcome (prediction) with the minimum change in input (patient data). Although we have selected these seven questions, it is, of course, possible to generate more or different questions. In our case, the insights gained from the DSS functionality were best suited for formulating these data-driven questions. Besides, counterfactual reasoning and the provision of confidence scores are methods frequently used to support human-AI decision-making [ 53 , 56 ]. In addition to data-driven questions, we also wanted to add some general questions. 

3.1.3 Interactive Visualisation for What-if Analysis. In addition to the questions, we decided to implement an interactive element that allows decision-makers to change the patient data, i.e., input data, using sliders, with the corresponding updated predictions displayed immediately (Fig. 2). The updated predictions and the original predictions of each treatment option are presented as two stacked bar charts, allowing for comparison between them. This interactive visualisation makes it possible to manually create input perturbations or ‘what-if’ questions, similar to the seventh question type, which displays hypothetical questions by generating perturbations computationally. Creating ‘what-if’ scenarios is a common method for examining the performance of machine learning models, which is typically intended for developers [ 53 ]. As such, decision-makers “can perform counterfactual reasoning, investigate decision boundaries, and explore how general changes to data points affect predictions, simulating different realities” [ 53 ]. In view of this, ‘what-if’ scenarios can be particularly helpful in clinical decision-making where different options need to be weighed up. 

4 Methods 

In order to gain initial insights into the usefulness of a decision-support system that, in professional practice, provides not only predictions but also questions, we conducted individual qualitative semi-structured interviews. We received approval from our institution’s ethics committee. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 9 

> Fig. 2. ‘What-if’ Analysis. An interactive visualisation that allows clinicians to manually create hypothetical ‘what-if’ scenarios by modifying input data using sliders. The predictions based on the initial patient data are shown in blue ( orig ), while the predictions based on the slider values are shown in red ( ref ). Table 2. Characteristics of our participants. While some participants use the DSS for both triage and consultation, the DSS Usage column indicates the primary use. Frequency of use was measured on a six-item scale ranging from “Once or twice a month” to “Several times a day”.

ID Profession Experience (years) DSS Use (years) DSS Use Frequency of Use 

P1 Orthopaedic Surgeon 9+ 6-8 Consultation Several times a week P2 Orthopaedic Surgeon 3-5 3-5 Triage Several times a week P3 Physician Assistant 6-8 3-5 Triage Several times a week P4 Orthopaedic Surgeon 9+ 9+ Consultation Several times a month P5 Orthopaedic Surgeon 9+ 6-8 Consultation Once or twice a week P6 Physician 9+ 9+ Consultation Several times a week P7 Orthopaedic Surgeon 6-8 6-8 Consultation Several times a week 

4.1 Participants 

Our participants are clinicians who work in the same spinal department and use a decision-support system for chronic low back pain, as described above (section 3). We recruited seven of the eleven clinicians (63.6%) working with the DSS in clinical practice through contacts with a researcher affiliated with the same hospital. Among the participants were five orthopaedic surgeons, one physician, and one physician assistant. Although the level of professional experience in orthopaedic practice varies among our participants, most of them are quite experienced; six participants have at least six years of professional experience. Moreover, each participant has at least three years of experience using the DSS in clinical practice, with five participants having six or more years of experience using the DSS. All participants use the DSS regularly, with the majority using it for patient consultation and to inform decision-making regarding treatment. The characteristics of our participants are summarised in Table 2. Each participant was compensated with 15 € for participating in the interview. 

4.2 Expert Interviews 

We conducted semi-structured interviews. All interviews took place in person at the practitioners’ offices and were conducted by the first author. With an introduction to the interview process and the collection of the consent forms, 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

10 Fischer et al. five interviews lasted about 60 minutes, while two lasted about 30 minutes due to the limited availability of the two participants. The general procedure of the interviews consists of the following three parts. In the first part, we asked the participants some general questions regarding their profession, when they started using the DSS, the frequency of use, and whether they perceived it as useful. We then showed them our prototype displaying treatment predictions based on a random patient case from our synthetic data set. We asked whether the visual representation looked familiar to them and whether the patient case was realistic. Some participants then guided us through their reasoning for that patient case, explaining how they made sense of the patient information and what treatment they would recommend. In the second part, we moved to the perceived usefulness of the questions and ‘what-if’ scenarios our prototype presents (Table 1). We showed the clinicians the questions one by one and, finally, the interactive ‘what-if’ visualisation. For each question, we asked them how they perceived it: whether they found it useful, whether they saw any value in it, whether it would help them in their decision-making, or whether it would annoy them. In the third part and at the end of the interview, we asked if they found a particular question helpful, whether they had anything to add, and explained the purpose of our approach of a system that outputs questions, i.e., to stimulate reflection during decision-making and mitigate overreliance. We collected and analysed data in a cyclical way. Each interview was analysed before conducting the next interview. Hence, previous interviews informed subsequent interviews, while the general procedure remained the same. This approach allowed us to compare findings and to seek clarification in further interviews. Besides, after the first interview, two authors discussed the procedure and slightly adjusted it to ensure that certain aspects were covered during the interviews, such as understanding the decision-making workflow and ensuring that participants understand the purpose of the questions in our prototype. 

4.3 Data Analysis 

We audio-recorded the interviews and transcribed them using noScribe 3. The first author checked the transcripts for correctness by going through the generated transcripts while listening to the recordings. We edited the transcripts for readability and removed personally identifiable information to preserve the anonymity of our participants. To analyse our data, we used thematic analysis, an open and flexible coding procedure [ 3 ]. Following the phases outlined by Braun and Clarke [3] , we first familiarised ourselves with the data. As the author who analysed the data had also conducted the interviews, they were able to actively engage with the data. We then generated initial codes. As mentioned, we collected data and analysed it iteratively. Hence, we refined the initial code book after each interview by improving codes, combining similar codes, creating relations, and updating (preliminary) themes. After two interviews, two authors discussed the initial code book. By showing only the codes to the other author, without the transcripts, we ensured the codes were sufficiently descriptive. We refined the codes accordingly, and the same two authors discussed the final code book again. We identified codes and themes primarily inductively (i.e., data-driven), meaning we did not use any pre-existing framework or codebook [ 3 ]. Nevertheless, our research questions guided us in a deductive manner to understanding how clinicians perceive our prototype. Furthermore, our analysis remained at the semantic level, meaning we focused on what the participants said without interpreting any underlying meanings that might have been constructed, for example, by the hospital’s organisational structures [3]. 

> 3https://github.com/kaixxx/noScribe. Version used: 0.6.2 Manuscript submitted to ACM

Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 11 

5 Findings 

We presented the participants our prototype (Fig. 1) that displays a patient case, the treatment prognoses, seven different questions about the patient case (Table 1), and an interactive visualisation for ‘what-if’ analysis (Fig. 2). All participants confirmed that our prototype looked familiar to them, as the way predictions were displayed resembled that of the DSS they use in clinical practice. Our initial concerns that our synthetic patient cases might be unrealistic, particularly regarding unusual combinations of symptoms or features, were minimised by the clinicians’ assurance that they had seen all possible combinations, as they deal with highly complex cases. As P2 explained, “We see all kinds of patients. So I don’t think there’s anything unrealistic over here”. The participants thus confirmed that our generated cases represent realistic cases that they could encounter in their work. In general, the clinicians we spoke to rated the DSS they use in clinical practice as helpful for their decision-making. As P4 noted, “we try to look for resources to help us with that decision, and the DSS is one of them”. Nevertheless, four participants mentioned that the biggest limitation is that the DSS does not take into account other diagnostics, such as MRI scans. P1 stated, “if you can machine learn the MRI and have the results introduced in this decision-making tool as well, then we could take a next step”. For this reason, the participants also pointed out that they do not regard overreliance on the predictions as a problem for themselves, as the DSS is just one source of information among many. Besides, given that the participants have been using the DSS for several years, they considered their understanding of how it works to be good and thus also developed a ‘feel’ for when they could trust the DSS’s predictions and when they could not. Below, we present the six themes we identified with regard to our research questions. The themes T1 and T2 (sections 5.1 & 5.2) relate to RQ1: How do clinicians perceive questions during decision-making? ; theme T3 (section 5.3) relates to RQ2: How do clinicians perceive an interactive visualisation for ‘what-if’ analysis? ; whereas themes T4 and T5 (sections 5.4 & 5.5) relate to both RQ1 and RQ2. Moreover, we identified theme T6 (section 5.6), as a synthesis of our two RQs, in which we provide recommendations for future friction strategies. 

5.1 T1: Questions Are Generally Regarded as Not Particularly Helpful in Stimulating Reflective Thinking Among Experienced Decision-Makers 

Participants rated our questions as not too helpful for decision-making, mainly for two reasons. First, our questions concerned aspects that our experienced participants take into consideration anyway , such as the location of previous surgery. As P2 explained, “the problem is that I think this is quite a difficult hospital to start with because we see terribly complex patients with lower back problems for over 40 years who have seen nine to 10 specialists previously. So we’re quite well trained in making a decision about who would benefit from an operation, and who would definitely not”. P1 demonstrated this expertise by providing a detailed and coherent rationale based on our synthetic patient case. In a similar vein, P4 admitted, “I don’t really see the relevance of asking questions to the physician”. Second, our questions did not address the decision-making context appropriately . P2 mentioned that the question addressing age is not relevant because “I think 90% of our patients is 50 plus”. Moreover, P3 added that age is not the most crucial factor to consider: “It’s [age] not as important as ODI, back and leg pain, but on the side, it’s important”. Similarly, P1 rated the question about the confidence score of the DSS as inapplicable, as this did not fit the clinical reasoning process, “whether this is with a 45% confidence interval, this is not how we work in the clinic” (P1). P6 confirmed this by saying, “We never believe that it [DSS] is 100% confident. I don’t think this will be very helpful”. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

12 Fischer et al. Nevertheless, participants pointed out several benefits, as we will discuss below. In addition, we will mention aspects that should be considered when formulating questions or designing similar friction strategies to encourage reflection (section 5.6). 

5.2 T2: Questions Can Support Decision-Making by Serving as Reminders to Consider Information 

Four participants (P2, P3, P6 & P7) pointed out that it would be useful to receive reminders. P2 noted that after a busy day, when attention is low, they might overlook (obvious) factors. As they explained, “In the reference letter, they [previous doctors] quite often refer to an MRI scan, which isn’t included. If it isn’t included and I’m at the end of the day, I’m really dreadful and I need a rest, then I think I need to see the surgery because it’s really clearly stated that there is no compression on the MRI scan. If it’s early in the morning, then I send an order to the secretary, please ask for the MRI scan so we can have a second look”. In this scenario, a question like “Did you look at the MRI scan?” (P2) could ensure that certain factors are considered, acting as a form of safeguard. P1 mentioned that they rarely consider age, “the age is not really on my mind when I use the [DSS]”. This is precisely where questions could be helpful, by reminding to consider certain facts. P6 corroborated this, “In the extreme cases, like below 20 and above 70, then it’s good to get a reminder, like, did you check the age”. P5 also confirmed that questions could help them pause for a moment and think things over again. 

5.3 T3: Hypothetical ‘What-if’ Scenarios Can Help to Improve Patient Care 

We showed the participants an interactive visualisation, which allows to manually create ‘what-if’ scenarios, by changing the input data through sliders (Fig. 2). Before showing the interactive plot to one participant, they expressed the need for these ‘what-if scenarios’ themselves, “if you could see a bar here, that is not as bright as this one, that would sort of predict what [the outcome] would be if there were no prior surgeries, I think that would help” (P4). All participants were pleasantly surprised to see the immediate change in the predictions, even though, in theory, they know about the effects of certain variables. As P4 noted, “from the literature, we know it’s true”. 

What-if analysis can help to consider alternative treatments. The hypothetical question that is based on counterfactual reasoning (question seven, e.g., “Is it possible to reduce BMI? This would increase the predicted effectiveness of surgey by 15%” ), allows clinicians to consider different courses of action. In doing so, another treatment could be recommended before going with the one the DSS recommends, such as surgery. P2 explained, “When we see an increase of 30% chance of succeeding by treating the somatisation, then we could send [the patient] to the psychiatrist and then we re-evaluate, and make a decision whether to operate or not”. Consequently, this forward-looking hypothetical question, which asks about the possibility of changing the predictor that has greatest influence on the prediction, could help clinicians to consider alternative or earlier treatment options. 

What-if analysis can be helpful in treatment. P1 mentioned that the hypothetical question could be helpful during treatment, “suppose you end up recommending the patient to conservative care and they go to this cognitive pain management program. Then, over there they should talk to the patient and say, okay, if you are willing to change, if you’re willing to do this, and if you expect improvement in your functional status, so maybe modify your expectations of recovery, in the end, you may have a better result”. Accordingly, what-if scenarios can give healthcare professionals, in this case in the field of cognitive pain therapy, a better understanding of the likely effects of a change in a patient’s functional status. 

Hypothetical scenarios can inform discussions with patients. Both the hypothetical question based on counterfactual reasoning and the interactive ‘what-if’ visualisation were recognised as helpful in persuading patients to change their 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 13 lifestyle during consultation. P3 explained, “If you know, okay, if the patient stops smoking and drops five kilograms the chances are really increasing by 25%. That would be really handy, then you can talk to the patient”. The same was expressed by P2, “So if I have a patient who is now like a 50% candidate for surgery, but when [“what if”] he has a normal BMI and when he stops smoking and [then] gets 80% [chance], that would be helpful”. In view of this, P6 noted, “we are really helped by tools that are convincing the patient to change [their] lifestyle”. 

Modifying information via the interactive input modality can help to make more accurate predictions. The current DSS used in clinical practice does not allow to adjust information. The participants, however, confirmed that changing information from the patient questionnaire can be helpful for various reasons. First, factors that are not relevant could be removed, such as previous surgeries at a different location on the spine. P5 commented on our prototype, “if I could just delete the previous surgery, what is the DSS saying then? This is really helpful”. Second, patients’ symptoms or circumstances may change between the time they complete the questionnaire and the day of their consultation, which may take place months later. P6 explained, “sometimes BMI is a problem and by the time of consultation, not any more, because we have quite long waiting times. Or sometimes they stopped smoking”. Third, it happens that patients misunderstand the questionnaire and ‘flip’ the pain score, for example. P7 mentioned, “sometimes I have patients that fill in a 10 [highest pain score] but they actually mean it’s perfect or they fill in a 0 [lowest pain score] because they say it doesn’t work at all. So they read it but they misinterpreted the question”. Fourth, patients might exaggerate their symptoms in the hope of being treated more quickly. “A lot of people think that, if they exaggerate a little bit on the score forms, it could be beneficial for them” (P5). In view of the above, hypothetical questions and an interactive element can help clinicians in their decision-making. 

5.4 T4: Clinicians Value Insights Into How the DSS Works 

Participants considered it instructive to see the impact of a feature on the prediction. In the beginning of the interview, P4 pointed out that it would be helpful for them to see the most contributing features of a prediction, “if you just get in a box next to it, the three main drivers for the prediction, I think that could really help”. For this reason, the interactive ‘what-if’ visualisation was found to be insightful. P5 mentioned, “I think what you just showed me, that you can see how important all the findings are on the prediction, that would help”. P7 corroborated the value of the ‘what-if’ scenarios, “Yeah, because now you at least can see which factors decided to steer it [the prediction] in a certain direction”. Similarly, the hypothetical question based on counterfactual reasoning was also perceived as insightful. This is because part of the question provided information on the estimated change in effect, e.g., the chances of the surgery being successful increase by 25% if the patient changes their expectations regarding recovery. When seeing the indicated change in outcome, P4 exclaimed, “Wow, that’s impressive”. P5 explained that seeing this change is helpful in understanding the DSS, “it gives more insight, of course, to how the whole tool works”. When showing the participants the question regarding age, i.e., whether age is relevant to consider when a patient is close to a certain threshold, participants were wondering about the built-in threshold of 50 years. It is important to note that the DSS, which the clinicians have been working with for several years and on which our prototype is based on, uses the same age threshold. P2 questioned the adequacy of the threshold value, “I understand there is a threshold for age, but I don’t know whether it should be 50” (P2). P5 raised similar concerns, “The only thing I think is that 50 years is a strange cut off moment”. Consequently, the question of our prototype helped them to become more aware of how the DSS works and, ultimately, more critical of it. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

14 Fischer et al. 

5.5 T5: Questions and the Interactive What-If Analysis Could Be Particularly Helpful for Novice Clinicians 

Our participants, who have multiple years of experience, noted that less experienced colleagues could potentially benefit from questions as well as from the interactive ‘what-if’ visualisation. Accordingly, P7 highlighted the benefit of questions serving as reminders for novice clinicians, “If they’ve missed it, because they didn’t ask it. And so, uh, if it would come as a pop-up, did you ask about the previous operations, then it can help them”. Similarly, P4 noted “I think if less experienced people don’t really know how it [DSS] works, for instance, with the previous surgery, they might say no to a patient for surgery, which actually might be suitable for surgery”. In view of this, P2 explained that the interactive visualisation could help clinicians become familiar with the DSS, “I think it would be really helpful for new colleagues or colleagues who start using the [DSS]. And just learning how to read it, how to use it. Don’t be quite blind and only use the DSS because when you see this really small change [...] it makes a huge difference in the response [prediction]”. Participants thus saw our prototype as a potential training tool that could help inexperienced decision-makers use the DSS and scrutinise its predictions more critically. 

5.6 T6: Aspects Designers Should Consider When Developing Friction Strategies 

As a synthesis of our two RQs, we identified five characteristics that should be considered when designing friction strategies. 

The friction strategy must go beyond the obvious and encourage unbiased reasoning. As mentioned, most of our questions addressed factors that the clinicians already take into account (T1). As such, the question about age was perceived as not too useful because the question addresses a well-known factor. When asked if the question could help them to consider something they might have forgotten, P5 replied, “I don’t think so, because you always think about age”. We identified the same pattern for the question regarding previous surgeries. Despite the question being relevant, it became clear that the participants already consider this factor in their reasoning. As highlighted by P2 (see T2), however, something that is obvious in the morning, when one’s mind is still fresh, might be less obvious at the end of the day, when one is tired. Hence, a question about an ‘obvious’ fact might be helpful in certain circumstances. Regardless, it is crucial to provide information or some trigger that is not part of standard reasoning and is instead new. Moreover, as P7 explained, “So you’re always biased, also in the way you’re trained. And so a surgeon will always think in surgical solutions”. Accordingly, it might be beneficial to promote divergent thinking and help decision-makers form a ‘second opinion’ that deviates from entrenched thought patterns in order to investigate the larger solution space. 

Varying Expertise and Individual Differences. Some questions were perceived differently by our participants. For the question about the confidence of the decision-maker, for example, P6 stated that this question would not help them, whereas P5 mentioned, “This could be a nice question. Because I think this is the problem, for me, at least”. Consequently, questions should ideally be personalised, particularly in view of differing decision-making requirements. P6 pointed out that the trigger for a question about age is likely to be different for physicians and surgeons, “for me, it’s [age threshold] below 20 and above 70. And I can imagine that for the surgeons the range when they want to get an alert is different, like, maybe above 60”. 

Actionability. The friction strategy must provide actionable insights. The usefulness of questions in stimulating reflective thinking depends on the availability of the answer. P6 commented on the question about previous surgeries, “if we know, it’s helpful, but if we don’t know, yeah it doesn’t help you”. P2 mentioned that although previous surgeries are indicated, “in 90% of cases they [other specialists] don’t even mention what level [the patient] was operated on”. At the same time, patients often do not know the details about previous surgeries, as P3 explained, “They say, I’ve been 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 15 operated in the back. With screws? Oh, I don’t know”. Moreover, although participants preferred the question regarding hypotheticals and the interactive what-if visualisation, they also mentioned that certain aspects cannot be changed, “But there’s a lot of things the patient cannot do anything about it. Like the duration of leg pain. Or previous surgery. It’s a fact” (P3). Similarly, P2 remarked, “I think that would be mainly helpful with things patient could change. So, his smoking behaviour, his BMI”. So although friction-based approaches can provide insights into the workings of the DSS (epistemic value), in certain cases clinicians may prefer a more practical approach (pragmatic value), in which the information provided must be actionable and accessible (e.g., factors that the patient can change). 

The Workflow and Decision-Making Context. When designing friction strategies, it is important to consider the decision-making process and the workflow. The participants mentioned that there are various decision points during the patient trajectory. As such, for the question regarding the assumptions of the decision-maker, P3 explained that the question could be helpful after seeing the patient, “If you see it [the DSS] after you saw the patients, then you can check it [assumptions] a bit. So then you can say, does the prediction match my assumption?”. At the same time, however, P1 noted that they already have certain assumptions before seeing the patient, “if you have this decision tool and you know this already before you see the patient, to some extent, you are a little bit biased when you see the patient”. Questions or other friction strategies could thus intervene at different times in the decision-making process, such as before or after seeing a patient. In addition, frictional strategies can, ideally, utilise or ask about contextual information from various sources to increase their relevance and effectiveness. The overall decision on how to treat a patient depends on additional diagnostics and examinations. As P7 explained when seeing a generated patient case, “there’s no clinical story here. And so, it’s, it’s only the model, but I use it to weigh my clinical decision making, based on the problem of the patient. So, you need the context of the patient, you need to know what the medical history is”. Certain (binary) data points, as presented by the DSS, need to be placed in a broader context. Besides, it could be that the patient reveals information that invalidates the prediction, or has strong preferences against a surgery, for example. 

Time Constraints. Friction strategies must be simple to understand. As P1 explained, “you have 20 minutes to see a patient”, and the time before consultation in which clinicians review the patient’s history and previous diagnostic, is limited as well. As a consequence, as P5 pointed out, “during your outpatient clinic, you’re always little bit in a hurry. Because you don’t have that much time”. P2 explained that our prototype would not be too helpful for them in their task of triaging patients, “because I have no time to play with all those graphs”. Another participant noted that the visualisation was easier to understand, “If you look at this, with, like, different colours and figures, it is better for surgeons. But if you have to read a lot, it’s not what we’re good at” (P5). Frictional strategies should therefore allow for (productive) interruptions while still fitting into existing workflows without being too complicated. 

6 Discussion 

We presented our findings on the perceived usefulness of two friction strategies, namely questions and ‘what-if’ analysis, focusing on a real-world decision-making context in which clinicians use a DSS in clinical practice. As our findings demonstrate, friction strategies such as questions and ‘what-if’ scenarios can in general serve different purposes, namely stimulating reflective or metacognitive thinking (T1), serving as reminders to consider information (T2), promoting practical action (T3), providing insights into how the model works (T4), and acting as an educational tool (T5). Our experienced decision-makers found that our questions did little to stimulate reflective thinking (Theme 1). One reason might be that some participants initially misunderstood the purpose of the questions provided by our prototype. As such, one assumed the questions would be addressed to patients as part of the questionnaire, while others assumed the questions were part of the interview questions. Even though this may have had a minor impact on our results, it 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

16 Fischer et al. rather shows that receiving questions from a DSS is an unlearned interaction. More important, however, is the fact that our participants have extensive experience both professionally and in working with the DSS. As such, they are trained to make careful considerations based on the patient information. Accordingly, the problem of overreliance did not appear to exist, even though the participants confirmed that the DSS’s predictions influence their decision-making. As our questions were designed to encourage reflection, it is only natural that they are not perceived as particularly useful in situations where decision-makers already reflect. It is therefore crucial to generate ‘the right’ question, one that is relevant to the decision-making context and encourages reflection, especially when the decision-makers are experts. We noticed that the clinicians we spoke to responded more positively to questions that included an estimated change in effect, for example, by showing the effect of previous surgery on the outcome. This information not only explains how the DSS works (Theme 4), but also provides a reason why decision-makers should entertain a particular question, and enables them to compare their own judgment with the DSS prognosis. One way to generate a different set of questions than the ones we used, and which allows for comparison between one’s own assumptions and the workings of the DSS, could be to utilise common explainable AI methods, such as feature contributions. Instead of providing the feature contribution in the form of a statement, 

“outcome because of x” , the explanation could be reformulated as a question, e.g., “Does outcome follow from x?” . This approach was also used in the aforementioned study by Danry et al . [11] . Importantly, this type of question provides decision-makers some information to help them reflect on their own assumptions, e.g., “Is this factor the most important one?”. Overall, frictional strategies should encourage open-minded thinking and help to form opinions that differ from preexisting assumptions or beliefs (Theme 6). As one participant mentioned, surgeons always look for surgical solutions. Similarly, Danry et al . [11] point out that personal factors and preexisting beliefs influence the decision-making process. Hence, it could be fruitful to tailor the questions to individual needs, e.g., based on expertise and depending on whether the decision-maker is a surgeon or a physician (Theme 6). Personalisation could also help to encourage divergent thinking and identify potential blind spots, thereby countering confirmation bias. Similarly, Reicherts et al . [45] also suggest to personalise questions by configuring the chatbot based on preferences and expertise, since some of their participants also rated the questions posed by the chatbot as irrelevant to their decision-making. Furthermore, in (clinical) decision-making, it is important to weigh different options. Thus, our participants rated the hypothetical question based on counterfactuals and the interactive ‘what-if’ analysis as most useful (Theme 3). These two methods show how changes to a specific input affect the predicted outcome. In doing so, it is possible to investigate alternatives to the current DSS predictions. Bach et al . [2] also report that “ophthalmologists stated that ‘consider the opposite’ would be the most helpful in ensuring that they do not miss any critical details”. In view of this, DSS should go beyond predicting the most likely outcome and instead allow for the consideration (and simulation) of alternatives, as clinicians or other expert decision-makers often know how to make decisions based on given information [2]. Given the time constraints in (clinical) decision-making, it is particularly important to balance a smooth workflow with meaningful interruptions or insights (Theme 6), for example, through personalisation. Bach et al . [2] found similar concerns about time constraints, and report that their mitigation strategy was rated as too intrusive, leaving participants feeling they were fact-checked by the AI system. Likewise, participants in the study by Reicherts et al . [45] rated the chatbot as “too pushy”. Our questions and ‘what-if’ analysis, on the other hand, were not perceived as such. Questions, therefore, offer a subtle design that can be integrated into the decision workflow. Against this backdrop, the approach of stimulating reflective thinking through questions and ‘what-if’ scenarios holds potential. As our participants further mentioned, questions can serve as reminders (Theme 2), especially when attention 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 17 is low, for example, at the end of the day (as opposed to the beginning), and thus help prevent impulsive actions. The same finding is reported by Reicherts et al . [45] , who found that questions about the reasons for financial decisions can help minimise irrational decisions. Moreover, our experienced participants emphasised the value of questions and ‘what-if’ scenarios for less experienced clinicians in learning how to use the DSS (Theme 5). As less experienced clinicians have less professional experience to draw from, they may rely more heavily on the DSS’s predictions. The finding that friction-based approaches could have educational benefits is consistent with prior research. The aforementioned study on mitigating cognitive biases in ophthalmology by Bach et al . [2] found that, “All ophthalmologists expressed that the debiasing techniques could be a learning tool for inexperienced screeners to heighten their diagnostic accuracy”. Given the potential advantages of questions and ‘what-if’ analysis in decision-making, it remains crucial to examine the appropriate circumstances, including sectors beyond healthcare, such as finance and education, and to involve decision-makers with diverse levels of expertise. Finally, our frictional strategies, like many others, focus on the decision-maker. It might be useful, however, to also address other stakeholders, e.g., patients, with questions or other frictional aids that help them to reflect on different aspects. In our use case, the DSS takes a patient-reported questionnaire as input. Patients could be assisted in completing the questionnaire to improve data reliability and quality. As such, the question regarding previous surgeries (when and at which region of the spine) could be directed to patients rather than clinicians. With self-reported data, experts, i.e., clinicians, will nevertheless have to assess the reliability of the data provided. Still, frictional approaches might also be beneficial to empower other stakeholders in the decision-making process. The question taxonomy we used as inspiration for our questions [16] could prove helpful to focus on other stakeholders. 

7 Limitations and Future Work 

Our work has some limitations. The sample size of seven participants makes it difficult to derive general conclusions. Nevertheless, we provide insights drawn from a real-world decision-making scenario involving experienced decision-makers. Besides, our sample size represents the majority of the clinicians who work with the DSS in clinical practice (7 out of 11, 63.6%). In view of this, and since our findings corroborate previous findings, we believe that our sample size is sufficient to provide meaningful information for future studies. While we asked clinicians about the perceived usefulness of questions, we do not know the actual effects of questions on the decision-making process. It may be that our questions would have had stimulated reflection under certain circumstances, even though the participants in the interviews assumed that they would have considered this line of reasoning anyway (e.g., when attention is low). Furthermore, the concerns raised by our participants relate specifically to the implementation of our prototype. We implemented seven different questions, whereby it is possible to generate more and different questions. This means that the exact implementation matters, which again limits general claims about the usefulness of questions during decision-making. Future studies should therefore (quantitatively) examine the impact of questions on decision-making, especially in relation to the cognitive engagement of decision-makers [ 15 ], using a larger and more varied sample (e.g., in terms of experience or time of day) as well as a broader and more diverse range of questions in order to identify the ‘right questions’ that stimulate reflection. Although we replicated a real-world decision task, i.e., treatment of chronic low back pain, the decision-making process in clinical practice is multifaceted. Clinicians receive more information than just the DSS predictions. During triage, the clinicians review notes on the patient’s medical history, as provided by the previous doctors who referred them to the hospital, as well as the available MRI scans. Clinicians preparing for the consultation might see additional notes from the colleague who did the prior triage. During consultation, the patient might reveal additional contextual 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

18 Fischer et al. information that requires the clinician to reconsider previous assumptions or treatment decisions. All these factors, however, can only be considered once a system is deployed and used in clinical practice. Nevertheless, the diverse sources of information and multiple decision points highlight the complexity of the decision task and underscore the potential value of questions that serve as reminders to verify or take certain information into account. Moreover, this layered decision-making process offers several points of intervention for friction-based approaches and a range of different questions that a system could ask. Hence, future work could, for example, examine the effectiveness of questions at different steps in the decision-making process. 

8 Conclusion 

In this case study, we set out to investigate the potential of a prototype system that presents questions and ‘what-if’ scenarios to clinicians during decision-making. For a real-world decision-task, we replicated a decision-support system (𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑐 ) that has been used in clinical practice for several years to predict treatment outcomes for chronic low back pain. In addition to the predictions, our prototype outputs questions based on the functionality of the DSS, its input data, i.e., tabular patient information, and its predictions. Moreover, our prototype enables clinicians to create ‘what-if’ scenarios by modifying input data using sliders. We conducted semi-structured, in-situ interviews to gather feedback on our prototype from clinical spine experts (n=7) who use 𝐷𝑆𝑆 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑐 .Using thematic analysis, we identified six themes for our two research questions. For RQ1, How do clinicians perceive questions during decision-making , we found that experts generally did not find our questions particularly helpful in stimulating reflection, as the questions concerned factors that they already take into account (Theme 1). Nevertheless, participants also mentioned that questions could serve as reminders to check certain information, especially when attention is low (Theme 2). For RQ2, How do clinicians perceive an interactive visualisation for ‘what-if’ analysis , we found that participant rated this input modality as useful (Theme 3), as it helps to consider alternative treatment options, it can inform discussions with patients, and it allows to modify input data thereby leading to more accurate predictions. In view of this, the interactive ‘what-if’ visualisation can help to improve patient care. Moreover, clinicians preferred both the ‘what-if’ visualisation and the hypothetical question based on counterfactual reasoning, as they provide insights into how the DSS works (Theme 4). Overall, participants mentioned that our prototype could be especially useful to novice clinicians in learning how to use the DSS (Theme 5). These findings highlight that questions and ‘what-if’ analysis can serve different purposes. Finally, based on the feedback from clinicians, we provided recommendations for the design of future friction strategies (Theme 6). Our findings corroborate previous findings on questions and cognitive bias mitigation strategies in human-AI interaction [ 2, 11 , 45 ]. Our work therefore contributes to the growing body of literature on frictional strategies in AI-assisted decision-making. Decision-support systems must be designed to encourage reflective thinking and promote cognitive engagement, particularly with regard to mitigating overreliance and supporting human oversight. 

Generative AI Usage Statement 

The authors used DeepL Translator to translate individual sentences in this article and adjust some sentence structures by translating the English sentence into another language and then back into English. Grammarly (with AI features turned off) was used to polish some sentences. Moreover, we used noScribe (version 0.6.2) to transcribe the audio-recordings of our interviews, from which we have used quotes throughout the article. We have checked the transcripts for accuracy, as described in the methods section. Apart from that, no generative AI tool was used to write this paper. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 19 

References 

[1] Benjamin Abdel-Karim, Nicolas Pfeuffer, K. Valerie Carl, and Oliver Hinz. 2023. How AI-Based Systems Can Induce Reflections: The Case of AI-Augmented Diagnostic Work. MIS Quarterly 47, 4 (December 2023), 1395–1424. doi:10.25300/MISQ/2022/16773 [2] Anne Kathrine Petersen Bach, Trine Munch Nørgaard, Jens Christian Brok, and Niels Van Berkel. 2023. “If I Had All the Time in the World”: Ophthalmologists’ Perceptions of Anchoring Bias Mitigation in Clinical AI Support. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Hamburg Germany, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581513 [3] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 2 (January 2006), 77–101. doi:10.1191/1478088706qp063oa [4] Zana Buçinca, Maja Barbara Malaya, and Krzysztof Z. Gajos. 2021. To Trust or to Think. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW1 (April 2021), 1–21. doi:10.1145/3449287 [5] Federico Cabitza, Lorenzo Famiglini, Caterina Fregosi, Samuele Pe, Enea Parimbelli, Giovanni Andrea La Maida, and Enrico Gallazzi. 2025. From Oracular to Judicial: Enhancing Clinical Decision Making through Contrasting Explanations and a Novel Interaction Protocol. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . ACM, Cagliari Italy, 745–754. doi:10.1145/3708359.3712157 [6] Zeya Chen and Ruth Schmidt. 2024. Exploring a Behavioral Model of “Positive Friction” in Human-AI Interaction. In Design, User Experience, and Usability , Aaron Marcus, Elizabeth Rosenzweig, and Marcelo M. Soares (Eds.). Vol. 14713. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 3–22. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-61353-1_1 [7] Michelene T.H. Chi, Nicholas De Leeuw, Mei-Hung Chiu, and Christian Lavancher. 1994. Eliciting Self-Explanations Improves Understanding. 

Cognitive Science 18, 3 (July 1994), 439–477. doi:10.1207/s15516709cog1803_3 [8] N. A. J. Cornelissen, R. J. M. van Eerdt, H. K. Schraffenberger, and W. F. G. Haselager. 2022. Reflection Machines: Increasing Meaningful Human Control over Decision Support Systems. Ethics and Information Technology 24, 2 (March 2022), 19. doi:10.1007/s10676-022-09645-y [9] Veerle M.H. Coupé, Miranda L. van Hooff, Marinus de Kleuver, Ewout W. Steyerberg, and Raymond W.J.G. Ostelo. 2016. Decision Support Tools in Low Back Pain. Best Practice &amp; Research Clinical Rheumatology 30, 6 (December 2016), 1084–1097. doi:10.1016/j.berh.2017.07.002 [10] Anna L. Cox, Sandy J.J. Gould, Marta E. Cecchinato, Ioanna Iacovides, and Ian Renfree. 2016. Design Frictions for Mindful Interactions: The Case for Microboundaries. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, San Jose California USA, 1389–1397. doi:10.1145/2851581.2892410 [11] Valdemar Danry, Pat Pataranutaporn, Yaoli Mao, and Pattie Maes. 2023. Don’t Just Tell Me, Ask Me: AI Systems That Intelligently Frame Explanations as Questions Improve Human Logical Discernment Accuracy over Causal AI Explanations. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23) . ACM, Hamburg Germany, 1–13. doi:10.1145/3544548.3580672 [12] Sander De Jong, Ville Paananen, Benjamin Tag, and Niels Van Berkel. 2025. Cognitive Forcing for Better Decision-Making: Reducing Overreliance on AI Systems Through Partial Explanations. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 9, 2 (May 2025), 1–30. doi:10.1145/3710946 [13] Thomas Dratsch, Xue Chen, Mohammad Rezazade Mehrizi, Roman Kloeckner, Aline Mähringer-Kunz, Michael Püsken, Bettina Baeßler, Stephanie Sauer, David Maintz, and Daniel Pinto dos Santos. 2023. Automation Bias in Mammography: The Impact of Artificial Intelligence BI-RADS Suggestions on Reader Performance. Radiology 307, 4 (May 2023), e222176. doi:10.1148/radiol.222176 [14] Ian Drosos, Advait Sarkar, Xiaotong, Xu, and Neil Toronto. 2025. "It Makes You Think": Provocations Help Restore Critical Thinking to AI-Assisted Knowledge Work. arXiv:2501.17247 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2501.17247 [15] Simon W.S. Fischer and Hanna Schraffenberger. 2025. How to Measure Cognitive Engagement in Machine-Assisted Decision-Making?. In Proceedings of the Workshops at the Fourth International Conference on Hybrid Human-Artificial Intelligence Co-Located with the Fourth International Conference on Hybrid Human-Artificial Intelligence (HHAI 2025) , Vol. 4074. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, Pisa, Italy, 98–109. [16] Simon W.S. Fischer, Hanna Schraffenberger, Serge Thill, and Pim Haselager. 2025. A Taxonomy of Questions for Critical Reflection in Machine-Assisted Decision-Making. Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society 8, 1 (October 2025), 940–954. doi:10.1609/aies.v8i1.36602 [17] Riccardo Fogliato, Shreya Chappidi, Matthew Lungren, Paul Fisher, Diane Wilson, Michael Fitzke, Mark Parkinson, Eric Horvitz, Kori Inkpen, and Besmira Nushi. 2022. Who Goes First? Influences of Human-AI Workflow on Decision Making in Clinical Imaging. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness Accountability and Transparency . ACM, Seoul Republic of Korea, 1362–1374. doi:10.1145/3531146.3533193 [18] Sandy J. J. Gould, Lewis L. Chuang, Ioanna Iacovides, Diego Garaialde, Marta E. Cecchinato, Benjamin R. Cowan, and Anna L. Cox. 2021. A Special Interest Group on Designed and Engineered Friction in Interaction. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Yokohama Japan, 1–4. doi:10.1145/3411763.3450404 [19] Pim Haselager, Hanna Schraffenberger, Serge Thill, Simon Fischer, Pablo Lanillos, Sebastiaan van de Groes, and Miranda van Hooff. 2024. Reflection Machines: Supporting Effective Human Oversight Over Medical Decision Support Systems. Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics 33, 3 (2024), 380–389. doi:10.1017/S0963180122000718 [20] Brian J. Hess, Rebecca S. Lipner, Valerie Thompson, Eric S. Holmboe, and Mark L. Graber. 2015. Blink or Think. Academic Medicine 90, 1 (January 2015), 112–118. doi:10.1097/ACM.0000000000000550 [21] Yueh-Ren Ho, Bao-Yu Chen, and Chien-Ming Li. 2023. Thinking More Wisely: Using the Socratic Method to Develop Critical Thinking Skills amongst Healthcare Students. BMC Medical Education 23, 1 (March 2023), 173. doi:10.1186/s12909-023-04134-2 [22] Muhammad Ishtiaq, Raisa Gul, Janet Holt, and Mustafeez Babar. 2024. Questioning Training and Critical Thinking of Undergraduate Students of Health and Social Sciences: A Scoping Review. Teaching and Learning in Nursing 19, 4 (October 2024), e602–e609. doi:10.1016/j.teln.2024.04.010 Manuscript submitted to ACM 20 Fischer et al. 

[23] Maia Jacobs, Melanie F. Pradier, Thomas H. McCoy, Roy H. Perlis, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Krzysztof Z. Gajos. 2021. How Machine-Learning Recommendations Influence Clinician Treatment Selections: The Example of Antidepressant Selection. Translational Psychiatry 11, 1 (February 2021), 108. doi:10.1038/s41398-021-01224-x [24] Daniel Kahneman. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow (first paperback edition ed.). Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York. [25] Amir-Hossein Karimi, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. 2021. Algorithmic Recourse: From Counterfactual Explanations to Interventions. In 

Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency . ACM, Virtual Event Canada, 353–362. doi:10.1145/3442188. 3445899 [26] Artur Klingbeil, Cassandra Grützner, and Philipp Schreck. 2024. Trust and Reliance on AI — An Experimental Study on the Extent and Costs of Overreliance on AI. Computers in Human Behavior 160 (November 2024), 108352. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2024.108352 [27] Vivian Lai, Chacha Chen, Alison Smith-Renner, Q. Vera Liao, and Chenhao Tan. 2023. Towards a Science of Human-AI Decision Making: An Overview of Design Space in Empirical Human-Subject Studies. In 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency . ACM, Chicago IL USA, 1369–1385. doi:10.1145/3593013.3594087 [28] Jingshu Li, Yitian Yang, Q. Vera Liao, Junti Zhang, and Yi-Chieh Lee. 2025. As Confidence Aligns: Understanding the Effect of AI Confidence on Human Self-confidence in Human-AI Decision Making. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Yokohama Japan, 1–16. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713336 [29] Shanshan Li, Jingwei Li, Huiran Li, Hongwei Zhu, and Xitong Li. 2026. Guided Reflection in AI-Assisted Decision-Making: Effects on AI Overreliance and Decision Accuracy. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Barcelona Spain, 1–19. doi:10. 1145/3772318.3790632 [30] Martin Lindvall, Claes Lundström, and Jonas Löwgren. 2021. Rapid Assisted Visual Search: Supporting Digital Pathologists with Imperfect AI. In 

26th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . ACM, College Station TX USA, 504–513. doi:10.1145/3397481.3450681 [31] Zhuoran Lu, Dakuo Wang, and Ming Yin. 2024. Does More Advice Help? The Effects of Second Opinions in AI-Assisted Decision Making. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 8, CSCW1 (April 2024), 1–31. doi:10.1145/3653708 [32] Shuai Ma, Chenyi Zhang, Xinru Wang, Xiaojuan Ma, and Ming Yin. 2024. Beyond Recommender: An Exploratory Study of the Effects of Different AI Roles in AI-Assisted Decision Making. arXiv:2403.01791 [cs] [33] Silvia Mamede, Henk G Schmidt, and Júlio César Penaforte. 2008. Effects of Reflective Practice on the Accuracy of Medical Diagnoses. Medical Education 42, 5 (May 2008), 468–475. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2923.2008.03030.x [34] Louie Søs Meyer and Jichen Zhu. 2024. Slide to Explore ’What If’: An Analysis of Explainable Interfaces. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2024 Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction . ACM, Uppsala Sweden, 1–6. doi:10.1145/3677045.3685416 [35] Tim Miller. 2023. Explainable AI Is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI!: Hypothesis-driven Decision Support Using Evaluative AI. In 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’23) . ACM, Chicago IL USA, 333–342. doi:10.1145/3593013.3594001 [36] Sooyohn Nam, Yeohyun Jung, and Hwajung Hong. 2025. From Impulsive Investment to Mindful Decisions: Exploring Design Opportunities of AI-Mediated Interventions for Emotionally Biased Investors. In Companion Publication of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference .ACM, Funchal Portugal, 374–378. doi:10.1145/3715668.3736345 [37] Chiara Natali, Mohammad Naiseh, Federico Cabitza, and Brett Frischmann. 2025. Better AI with Designed Friction: Theories, Applications and Research Agenda. In Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications , Dino Pedreschi, Michela Milano, Ilaria Tiddi, Stuart Russell, Chiara Boldrini, Luca Pappalardo, Andrea Passerini, and Shenghui Wang (Eds.). IOS Press. doi:10.3233/FAIA250680 [38] Barbara Oakley, Michael Johnston, Ken-Zen Chen, Eulho Jung, and Terrence Sejnowski. 2025. The Memory Paradox: Why Our Brains Need Knowledge in an Age of AI. doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2506.11015 [39] Jennifer Osmond and Yvonne Darlington. 2005. Reflective Analysis: Techniques for Facilitating Reflection. Australian Social Work 58, 1 (March 2005), 3–14. doi:10.1111/j.0312-407X.2005.00179.x [40] Khaled Ouanes and Nesren Farhah. 2024. Effectiveness of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Clinical Decision Support Systems and Care Delivery. Journal of Medical Systems 48, 1 (August 2024), 74. doi:10.1007/s10916-024-02098-4 [41] Joon Sung Park, Rick Barber, Alex Kirlik, and Karrie Karahalios. 2019. A Slow Algorithm Improves Users’ Assessments of the Algorithm’s Accuracy. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (November 2019), 1–15. doi:10.1145/3359204 [42] Shivesh Prakash, Ruth M. Sladek, and Lambert Schuwirth. 2019. Interventions to Improve Diagnostic Decision Making: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis on Reflective Strategies. Medical Teacher 41, 5 (2019), 517–524. doi:10.1080/0142159X.2018.1497786 [43] Mattia Prosperi, Yi Guo, Matt Sperrin, James S. Koopman, Jae S. Min, Xing He, Shannan Rich, Mo Wang, Iain E. Buchan, and Jiang Bian. 2020. Causal Inference and Counterfactual Prediction in Machine Learning for Actionable Healthcare. Nature Machine Intelligence 2, 7 (July 2020), 369–375. doi:10.1038/s42256-020-0197-y [44] Muhammad Raees, Vassilis-Javed Khan, Ioanna Lykourentzou, and Konstantinos Papangelis. 2026. Do People Appropriately Rely on AI-Advice? An Analytical Review of HCI Research on Human-AI Decision-Making. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Barcelona Spain, 1–24. doi:10.1145/3772318.3791467 [45] Leon Reicherts, Gun Woo Park, and Yvonne Rogers. 2022. Extending Chatbots to Probe Users: Enhancing Complex Decision-Making Through Probing Conversations. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Conversational User Interfaces . ACM, Glasgow United Kingdom, 1–10. doi:10.1145/ 3543829.3543832 [46] Advait Sarkar. 2024. AI Should Challenge, Not Obey. Commun. ACM 67, 10 (September 2024), 18–21. doi:10.1145/3649404 Manuscript submitted to ACM Friction in AI-Assisted Clinical Decision-Making: A Case Study on The Role of Questions and ‘What-if’ Scenarios 21 

[47] Kacper Sokol and Peter Flach. 2020. One Explanation Does Not Fit All: The Promise of Interactive Explanations for Machine Learning Transparency. 

KI - Künstliche Intelligenz 34, 2 (June 2020), 235–250. doi:10.1007/s13218-020-00637-y [48] Reed T. Sutton, David Pincock, Daniel C. Baumgart, Daniel C. Sadowski, Richard N. Fedorak, and Karen I. Kroeker. 2020. An Overview of Clinical Decision Support Systems: Benefits, Risks, and Strategies for Success. npj Digital Medicine 3, 1 (February 2020), 17. doi:10.1038/s41746-020-0221-y [49] Harry Yizhou Tian, Hasan Amin, and Ming Yin. 2026. Understanding the Effects of AI-Assisted Critical Thinking on Human-AI Decision Making. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Barcelona Spain, 1–30. arXiv:2602.10222 [cs] doi:10.1145/3772318.3790785 [50] Helena Vasconcelos, Matthew Jörke, Madeleine Grunde-McLaughlin, Tobias Gerstenberg, Michael S. Bernstein, and Ranjay Krishna. 2023. Explana-tions Can Reduce Overreliance on AI Systems During Decision-Making. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 7, CSCW1 (April 2023), 1–38. doi:10.1145/3579605 [51] Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. 2017. Counterfactual Explanations Without Opening the Black Box: Automated Decisions and the GDPR. SSRN Electronic Journal 31, 2 (2017). doi:10.2139/ssrn.3063289 [52] Seán Walsh, Evelyn E.C. De Jong, Janna E. Van Timmeren, Abdalla Ibrahim, Inge Compter, Jurgen Peerlings, Sebastian Sanduleanu, Turkey Refaee, Simon Keek, Ruben T.H.M. Larue, Yvonka Van Wijk, Aniek J.G. Even, Arthur Jochems, Mohamed S. Barakat, Ralph T.H. Leijenaar, and Philippe Lambin. 2019. Decision Support Systems in Oncology. JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics 3 (December 2019), 1–9. doi:10.1200/CCI.18.00001 [53] James Wexler, Mahima Pushkarna, Tolga Bolukbasi, Martin Wattenberg, Fernanda Viegas, and Jimbo Wilson. 2019. The What-If Tool: Interactive Probing of Machine Learning Models. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 26, 1 (2019), 56–65. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934619 [54] Chunpeng Zhai, Santoso Wibowo, and Lily D. Li. 2024. The Effects of Over-Reliance on AI Dialogue Systems on Students’ Cognitive Abilities: A Systematic Review. Smart Learning Environments 11, 1 (June 2024), 28. doi:10.1186/s40561-024-00316-7 [55] Shao Zhang, Jianing Yu, Xuhai Xu, Changchang Yin, Yuxuan Lu, Bingsheng Yao, Melanie Tory, Lace M. Padilla, Jeffrey Caterino, Ping Zhang, and Dakuo Wang. 2024. Rethinking Human-AI Collaboration in Complex Medical Decision Making: A Case Study in Sepsis Diagnosis. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642343 [56] Yunfeng Zhang, Q. Vera Liao, and Rachel K. E. Bellamy. 2020. Effect of Confidence and Explanation on Accuracy and Trust Calibration in AI-assisted Decision Making. Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency null (January 2020), 295–305. doi:10.1145/3351095.3372852 

Received June 15, 2026 

Manuscript submitted to ACM